# Spatial analysis of CAFOs and TB in North Carolina
Large-scale industrial animal husbandry facilities, or concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs), are associated with negative health outcomes in communities near them and among workers. While research has explored the impact of CAFOs on pollution and antimicrobial resistance, less research has investigated the association between CAFOs and tuberculosis. This study examines the relationship between tuberculosis incidence and CAFO density at the county level in North Carolina (NC) in 2023.

Using publicly available data, we employed a bivariate Moran’s I test to assess whether there is spatial autocorrelation and co-clustering of tuberculosis incidence and CAFO density. We then used a spatial regression model to investigate the relationship between tuberculosis and CAFOs while controlling for other important covariates, focusing on population density, percent of people living in poverty, and hospital beds per person. To assess whether this relationship was unique to tuberculosis or more broadly observed, we repeated the analyses on other respiratory illnesses, such as influenza and pneumococcus.

Preliminary results show a significant relationship between tuberculosis incidence and CAFO density. Bivariate Moran’s I tests revealed that tuberculosis incidence and CAFO density exhibited shared spatial autocorrelation, meaning that counties with high tuberculosis incidences tended to have or be near counties with high CAFO densities. The spatial regression found that increasing CAFO density is strongly associated with increased tuberculosis incidence even after controlling for demographic, sociodemographic, and healthcare access covariates. Analyses of other respiratory illnesses did not reveal any significant relationships with CAFOs, suggesting that CAFOs may have a unique impact on tuberculosis.

This work contributes to the growing body of research on the health impacts of industrial agriculture and emphasizes the need for targeted surveillance and interventions in high-risk areas. Further investigation is needed to determine whether the observed associations reflect direct transmission dynamics or indirect drivers of tuberculosis.

